+-----------------------------------+
| Apertium - Advanced web interface |
| Usage instructions                |
+-----------------------------------+


See INSTALL for instructions to install this system to a web server.


--------
I. USAGE
--------


The translation interface, translate.php, is a web page splitted vertically, the left and right side containing tools that are used respectively before and after the translation process.


Basic translation process
-------------------------

First, you should select the language pair to use for the translation using the drop-down menu on top left of the page. It contains all language pairs installed on the server.
Then, you can type the text to translate in the left text edition field. By clicking translate, you'll get the translation of this text in the right text field.

This interface, however, is built with many additional tools that will be described below.



Spelling and Grammar checking
-----------------------------

If Javascript is activated, you will be able to check for mistakes in the texts from both the left and right text fields. This is done by clicking the "Check for mistakes" button, over the top-right corner of each field.

As a result, all spelling mistakes detected should appear with a red-dotted underline, while grammar mistakes will appear with a blue-dotted underline.
For grammar mistakes, hovering your mouse pointer over the location of the mistake should give you a description of it.
In both cases, if the system is able to suggest corrections, you will see them by clicking on that mistake: it will open a list of suggestions.
Clicking away from that list will close it; clicking on a word in it will replace the erroneous text by this suggestion.



Getting dictionary definitions
------------------------------

When you don't really know what suggestion is the best, you can easily consult external dictionaries to get the definition or translation of all these suggestions. If such dictionaries are available, they will appear in the "Dictionary" drop-down list below the text field: you can then chose the one you want to consult.
When a dictionary is selected, all suggestion links will come with a search icon that'll open this suggestion's definition in a new tab.



Global manual replacements
--------------------------

This interface contains a tool to automatically replace some recurrent parts of your text.
You can add elements to the manual replacements list by clicking the "+" button below it. It will create a new row containing the fields to define your replacement.

The left field is the word that will have to be matched in the text. 
The right field is the replacement you will use for this word.
The drop-down menu enables you to set the case sensitivity. The default setting, "Apply source case", will be the best in most situations, as it will try to keep the case of the original match. In other words, if the word matched started with an uppercase letter, so will the replacement; if the match was all lowercase, so will the replacement, etc. The other modes (case sensitive or insensitive) will both apply the exact replacement given.
The "-" button in a row enables you to delete that row.

Once you have set this list, click the "Apply replacements" button to actually apply all the replacements from that list.



Generating a translation memory
-------------------------------

When you are satisfied with your translation, you can click the button "Generate TMX", that will enable you to download a translation memory in TMX format.



Generating edition logs
-----------------------

This interface is able to track all the manual edits you make to the text before and after the translation. When you are satisfied, click the "Get Logs" button to open these logs in a new tab.



Translating formatted documents
-------------------------------

This interface is able to handle formatted documents as input. For this, you will need to visit the index.php page and fill the file transmission form.
First, select the file to upload. If you want to force interpreting it as a specific format, type the corresponding extension in the empty text field; else, leave it empty to use automatic mode. Then click the "Translate" button: that will open the translation interface with the text from that document already loaded in the left text field.

While you edit the text, you will notice there are some "empty" characters that you can't delete: those contain the formatting information of the original document, that you cannot edit during this translation process.

When you're satisfied by your translation, you can click the "Get Translation result" button, that will enable you to download the translated file.
Currently, supported formats are "rtf wxml docx pptx xlsx odt ods odp html mediawiki pdf png jpg jpeg tiff tif txt" (perhaps less, depending on your installation).



Improving your translation with TMX file
--------------------------------------

On the home page, there is an interface to add a TMX file to your translation process. First, select (in the field named TMX) URL, File or TMServer.
Then, if you have selected URL, enter an URL targeting a TMX file (in the right language pair, of course). If you have selected File, you can upload a local TMX file.
Finally, if you have selected TMServer, you can directly choose the interesting language pair, and the corresponding server's TMX file will be loaded.

Once your translation finished, if you made some change on the result, you can improve the TMServer database with your changes by clicking on 'Add TMX to the TMServer'.



Changing Interface Language
---------------------------

On the top of the page, there is an orange streamer. In this streamer, you can select a language (from language avalaible on the server), and the interface will be changed.
Normally, the language is automatically set, regarding the default language of your browser.



Using apertium.org instead of local installation
------------------------------------------------

You can use the website apertium.org, if you want. To enable this feature, set the value 'use_apertiumorg' on TRUE in includes/config.php, and FALSE if you want to deactivate it.
This feature is transparent for the user, and the rest of the interface works as usual.



Translating page from Wikipedia
-------------------------------

On the index.php interface, select Wikipage in Source text part. Then, enter the URL of the mediawiki page's edit. When you click on Translate button, it will retrieve the source from the mediawiki server and display it in the left part of the translation part (formatted as a mediawiki document).

Two buttons will appear in the bottom of the page. When you have finished your job, click on 'Save page' to save the page or 'Preview changes' to preview the page on the mediawiki website. The Save and the Preview are done using your own session on the website. This means that if you're logged in on the wiki, changes are saved using your login information.



Modifying your configuration
----------------------------

Your main configuration is set in includes/config.php file. If you want to change something, there is a script, install.php, to help you during this process. For more information, refer to INSTALL file.



Enable/Disabled modules
-----------------------

The interface for consulting modules descriptions, and for enabling/disabling them, is within the configuration part of the file install.php. For more information, refer to INSTALL file.



Publishing your website
-----------------------

If you're ready to pusblih your website on the Internet, publish.php script can help you. It will regenerate Javascript files according to loaded modules, compress Javascript files to speed-up page loading, compress CSS files to speed-up page loading, and delete it self (for security reasons).



----------------
II. KNOWN ISSUES
----------------

Due to its "experimental" status, this project suffers from a few issues. As of 04/08/2011, know issues are:


1*	Characters inputted through special composition methods (like the Linux compose key) will cause the edition logs to fail in Firefox, due to it not supporting the universal textInput event. It should work fine with Chrome or Safari.

2*	It is possible to copy/paste text in the translation area only for browsers that have the corresponding events.

3*	So far, there is a problem of rendering for PDF format, at the rebuilding step. Background and picture can be loss.

4*	When deactiving Logs module, there is a Javascript error (invisible for normal user) when replacing mistakes.



----------------
More information
----------------

If you want to have a look at the process, or get more details about a feature, there is the project apertium wiki page at: http://wiki.apertium.org/wiki/User:Commial/AWI
